hi alan stratton from as wood turns the
holy grail if you will for wood turning
is the hollow form now think of a hollow
form as being a chunk wood revolving a
high speed and you take a bent tool and
jam it in there and hope to hollow out
the inside now never mind that you get a
catch on the inside of that you may blow
up your bowl blow up your shoulder your
arm whatever how about another way to do
a hollow form how about a segmented
hollow form complete with the narrowest
opening that you could ever imagine or
ever want in a hollow form so how about
an easy way to do a hollow form let's
make it for a solid turning I could
simply mount a hunk of wood on the lathe
start turning and let the shape emerge
in contrast segmented turning must start
with a plan am using power point i I've
drawn a grid on a master layout then on
a side
I draw my shape on top of the grid
having the grid on the master avoids
accidentally selecting a grid element
when drawing after drawing the shape i
overlay rectangles with my expected
segments cross-section in PowerPoint it
is possible to specify the exact width
and height of the rectangle from this
overlay I estimate the outer diameter
and segment width that I'll need for the
hollow form this I enter into a
worksheet which then calculates the
segment length for each ring this one
will have five rings each with eight
segments for only 40 pieces of wood plus
one small plug in the base the cutting
angle is 22 and a half degrees then off
to the miter saw to cut the segments I
always use a piece of wood to hold down
the segment instead of a finger my
fingers are not a renewable resource I
try to always cut the long side against
the fence this is especially important
with very short segments that may tend
to tilt on a very tiny side to go the
half rings I lay out a double layer of
masking tape with the sticky side up
after placing the segments on the tape I
tear off the ends
that tend to get in the way then spread
Titebond original extend on the segments
and clamp with a band clamp I purchased
these long band clamps at an automotive
parts store these have a screw mechanism
that tilts up for quick adjustment so
that I can use a long clamp for very
short pieces I'm using small bolts as
spacers between the half rings after the
glue dries I'll send one face of each
for half ring slightly so that it will
sit flat no need to be perfectly flat
I'll do that later after the ring is
complete then with the flat face down
I'll sand the mating surfaces for the
final glow joint this eliminates the
accumulated error from cutting angles
the twists and turns of the wood finally
I closed the half rings into full rings
after the glue dries I'll send one face
perfectly smooth all tool the other side
flat and parallel on the lathe since
right now I don't have access to a
thickness sander now with the top ring
mounted to a wood faceplate with hot
melt glue I'll round it off just a
little then true the face after making
sure the face is flat I can glue on the
next ring I've mounted the next ring to
another faceplate with a couple of dabs
of hot melt glue the face plate has
concentric rings drawn on the surface to
help position the ring on center then I
can use the tail stock to clamp the two
rings together
with this Gorge art dry I'll rough trim
the top section more importantly I'll
true up the face that I'll go to later
meanwhile I followed the same process to
build the bottom section of my hollow
form this is where I appreciate multiple
face plates since I make and threaten my
own wood faceplates I can have as many
as I want in any size that I want
now I've switched over to the bottom
section of the hollow form I'll do a
rough hollow now just to get the
interior uniform I don't want to do very
much of the interior until I'm sure of
the exterior shape at this point I still
have the upper and lower sections
separate I'll reverse the top section
onto the tailstock with a cone Center on
the live Center
I'll tool the two pieces together with
only tailstock pressure while I
establish the exterior profile
now with the exterior completed I'll
hollow out the bottom section my gouge
works good enough for this task
then switch to finish hollowing with the
top section
finally I conclude the two sections
together the tailstock supplies the
clamping pressure with the hollow form
now glued together I can refine its
exterior but I have to be careful I know
I have about 3/8 inch wall thickness on
the sides and a little bit more on the
top that'll be plenty I'll use a gouge
both in cutting mode and ensure scraping
mode whichever feels right at the time
you
with the temper sanded through 400 grit
and walnut oil applied I'll part it off
from the faceplate aiming to be just a
little concave on the bottom by the way
I had glued the base section to the
faceplate with standard yellow glue I'll
clean up the bottom by mounting a small
sanding disc in a Jacob's Chuck and
sanding off any remaining marks I
usually do this in a drill press which
is safer than using the lathe and voila
a completed hollow form without any
caches or shoulder injures no blind tool
work it has a smaller opening than I've
ever seen in solid work in fact I
drilled it out a little more so that it
can receive a flower stem or whatever
what possibilities do you see please
click the like button on this video and
subscribe to both my website and YouTube
channel
always wear your face shield until next
time this is alan stratton from as wood
turns